***************************************************
Pure Functional Programming as Runnable Mathematics
***************************************************

What we'd really like would be a language that gives us everything:
the expressiveness and the *safety* of mathematical logic (there's no
concept of a memory in logic, and thus no possibility for unexpected
interactions through or aliasing of memory), with the efficiency and
interactivity of imperative code. Sadly, there is no such language.

Fortunately, there is an important point in the space between these
extremes: in what we call *pure functional,* as opposed to imperative,
*programming* languages. Pure functional languages are based not on
commands that update memories and perform I/O, but on the definition
of functions and their application to data values. The expressiveness
of such languages is high, in that code often directly refects the
mathematical definitions of functions. And because there is no notion
of an updateable (mutable) memory, aliasing and interactions between
far-flung parts of programs through *global variables* simply cannot
happen. Furthermore, one cannot perform I/O in such languages. These
languages thus provide far greater safety guarantees than imperative
languages.  Finally, unlike mathematical logic, code in functional
languages can be run with reasonable efficiency, though often not with
the same efficiency as in, say, C++. 

In this chapter, you will see how functional languages allow one to
implement runnable programs that closely mirror the mathematical
definitions of the functions that they implement.


The identify function (for integers)
====================================

An *identity function* is a function whose values is simply the value
of the argument to which it is applied. For example, the identify
function applied to an integer value, *x*, just evaluates to the value
of *x*, itself. In the language of mathematical logic, the definition
of the function would be written like this.

.. math::

   \forall x \in \mathbb{Z}, x.

In English, this would be pronounced, "for all (:math:`\forall`)
values, *x*, in (:math:`\in`) the set of integers
(:math:`\mathbb{Z}`), the function simply reduces to value of *x*,
itself. The infinite set of integers is usually denoted in
mathematical writing by a script or bold Z. We will use that
convention in these notes.

While such a mathematical definition is not "runnable", we can
*implement* it as a runnable program in pure functional language. The
code will then closely reflects the abstract mathematical definition.
And it will run!  Here's an implementation of *id* written in the
functional sub-language of Dafny.

.. code-block:: dafny

   function method id (x: int): int { x }

The code declares *id* to be what Dafny calls a "function method",
which indicates two things.  First, the *function* keyword states that
the code will be written in a pure functional, not in an imperative,
style. Second, the *method* keyword instructs the compiler to produce
runnable code for this function.

Let's look at the code in detail. First, the name of the function is
defined to be *id*. Second, the function is defined to take just one
argument, *x*, declared of type *int*.  The is the Dafny type whose
values represent integers (negative, zero, and positive whole number)
of any size. The Dafny type *int* thus represents (or *implements*)
the mathematical set, :math:`{\mathbb Z}`, of all integers. The *int*
after the argument list and colon then indicates that, when applied to
an int, the function returns (or *reduces to*) a value of type *int*.
Finally, within the curly braces, the expression *x*, which we call
the *body* of this function definition, specifies the value that this
function reduces to when applied to any *int*. In particular, when
applied to avalue, *x*, the function application simply reduces to the
value of *x* itself.

Compare the code with the abstract mathematical definition and you
will see that but for details, they are basicaly *isomorphic* (a word
that means identical in structure). It's not too much of a stretch to
say that pure functional programs are basically runnable mathematics.

Finally, we need to know how expressions involving applications of
this function to arguments are evaluated. They fundamental notion at
the heart of functional programming is this: to evaluate a function
application expression, such as *id(4)*, you substiute the value of
the argument (here *4*) for every occurence of the argument variable
(here *x*) in the body of the function definition, the you evaluate
that expression and return the result. In this case, we substite *4*
for the *x* in the body, yielding the literal expression, *4*, which,
when evaluated, yeilds the value *4*, and that's the result.

Data and function types
=======================


Before moving on to more interesting functions, we must mention the
concepts of *types* and *values* as they pertain to both *data* and
*functions*. Two types appear in the example of the *id* function. The
first, obvious, one is the type *int*. The *values* of this type are
*data* values, namely values representing integers. The second type,
which is less visible in the example, is the type of the the function,
*id*, itself. As the function takes an argument of type *int* and also
returns a value of type *int*, we say that the type of *id* is
:math:`int \rightarrow int`. You can pronounce this type as *int to
int*.

Other function values of the same type
======================================

There are many (indeed an uncountable infinity of) functions that
convert integer values to other integer values. All such functions
have the same type, namely :math:`int \rightarrow int`, but they
constitute different function *values*. While the type of a function
is specified in the declaration of the function argument and return
types, a function *value* is defined by the expression comprising the
*body* of the function.

An example of a different function of the same type is what we will
call *inc*, short for *increment*. When applied to an integer value,
it reduces to (or *returns*) that value plus one. Mathematically, it
is defined as :math:`\forall x \in {\mathbb Z}, x + 1`. For example,
*inc(2)* reduces to *3*, and *inc(-2)*, to *-1*.

Here's a Dafny functional program that implements this function. You
should be able to understand this program with ease. Once again, take
a moment to see the relationship between the abstract mathematical
definition and the concrete code. They are basically isomorphic. The
pure functional programmer is writing *runnable mathematics*.

.. code-block:: dafny

   function method inc (x: int): int { x + 1 }


Another example of a function of the same type is, *square*, defined
as returing the square of its integer argument. Mathematically it is
the function, :math:`\forall x \in {\mathbb Z}, x * x`. And here is
a Dafny implementation. 

.. code-block:: dafny

   function method h (x: int): int { x * x }

Evaluating expressions in which this function is applied to an
argument happens as previously described. To evaluate *square(4)*, for
example, you rewrite the body, *x \* x*, replacing every *x* with a
*4*, yielding the expression *4 \* 4*, then you evaluate that
expression and return the result, here *16*. Function evaluation is
done by substituting actual parameter values for all occurrences of
corresponding formal parameters in the body of a function, evaluating
the resulting expression, and returning that result.


Recursive function definitions and implementations
=================================================+

Many mathematical functions are defined *recursively*. Consider the
familiar *factorial* function. An informal explanation of what the
function produces when applied to a natural number (a non-negative
integer), *n*, is the product of natural numbers from *1* to *n*.

That's a perfectly understandable definition, but it's not quite
precise (or even correct) enough for a mathematician. There are at
least two problems with this definition. First, it does not define the
value of the function *for all* natural numbers. In particular, it
does not say what the value of the function is for zero. Second, you
can't just extend the definition by saying that it yields the product
of all the natural numbers from zero to *n*, because that is always
zero!

Rather, if the function is to be defined for an argument of zero, as
we require, then we had better define it to have the value one when
the argument is zero, to preserve the product of all the other numbers
larger than zero that we might have multiplied together to produce the
result. The trick is to write a mathematical definition of factorial
in two cases: one for the value zero, and one for any other number.

.. math::

   factorial(n) := \forall n \in {\mathbb Z} \mid n >= 0, \begin{cases}
   \text{if n=0}, & 1,\\ \text{otherwise}, & n *
   factorial(n-1).\end{cases}

To pronounce this mathematical definition in English, one would say
that for any integer, *n*, such that *n* is greater than or equal to
zero, *factorial(n)* is one if *n* is zero and is otherwise *n* times
*factorial(n-1)*.
   
Let's analyze this definition. First, whereas in earlier examples we
left mathematical definitions anonymous, here we have given a name,
*factorial*, to the function, as part of its mathematical definition.
We have to do this because we need to refer to the function within its
own definition.  When a definition refers to the thing that is being
defined, we call the definition *recursive.*

Second, we have restricted the *domain* of the function, which is to
say the set of values for which it is defined, to the non-negative
integers only, the set known as the *natural numbers*. The function
simply isn't defined for negative numbers.  Mathematicians usually use
the symbol, :math:`{\mathbb N}` for this set. We could have written
the definition a little more concisely using this notation, like this:

.. math::
   
   factorial(n) := \forall n \in {\mathbb N}, \begin{cases}
   \text{if n=0}, & 1,\\ \text{otherwise}, & n *
   factorial(n-1).\end{cases}


Here, then, is a Dafny implementation of the factorial function.

.. code-block:: dafny

   function method fact(n: int): int 
      requires n >= 0 // for recursion to be well founded
   { 
       if (n==0) then 1 
       else n * fact(n-1) 
   }

This code exactly mirrors our first mathematical definition. The
restriction on the domain is expressed in the *requires* clause of the
program. This clause is not runnable code. It's a specification: a
*predicate* (a proposition with a parameter) that must hold for the
program to be used. Dafny will insist that this function only ever be
applied to values of *n* that have the *property* of being :math:`>=
0`. A predicate that must be true for a program to be run is called a
*pre-condition*.

To see how the recursion works, consider the application of
*factorial* to the natural number, *3*. We know that the answer should
be *6. The evaluation of the expression, *factorial(3)*, works as for
any function application expression: first you subsitute the value of
the argument(s) for each occurrence of the formal parameters in the
body of the function; then you evaluate the resulting expression
(recursively!) and return the result. For *factorial(3)*, this process
leads through a sequence of intermediate expressions as follows (leaving
out a few details that should be easy to infer):

.. math::

   factorial\ (3) & \text{ ; a function application expression}

   if\ (3 == 0)\ then\ 1\ else\ (3 * factorial\ (3-1)) & \text{ ; expand body with  parameter/argument substitution}

   if\ (3 == 0)\ then\ 1\ else\ (3 * factorial\ (2))  & \text{ ; evaluate $(3-1)$}

   if\ false\ then\ 1\ else\ (3 * factorial\ (2)) & \text{ ; evaluate $(3==0)$ }

   (3 * factorial\ (2)) & \text{ ; evaluate $ifThenElse$ }

   (3 * (if\ (2==0)\ then\ 1\ else\ (2 * factorial\ (1))) & \text{ ; etc }

   (3 * (2 * factorial\ (1))

   (3 * (2 * (if\ (1==0)\ then\ 1\ else\ (1 * factorial\ (0)))))

   (3 * (2 * (1 * factorial\ (0))))

   (3 * (2 * (1 * (if\ (0==0)\ then\ 1\ else\ (0 * factorial\ (-1))))))

   (3 * (2 * (1 * (if\ true\ then\ 1\ else\ (0 * factorial\ (-1))))))

   (3 * (2 * (1 * 1)))

   (3 * (2 * 1))

   (3 * 2)

   6

The evaluation process continues until the function application expression
is reduced to a data value. That's the answer!

It's important to understand how recursive function application
expressions are evaluated. Study this example with care. Once you're
sure you see what's going on, go back and look at the mathematical
definition, and convince yourself that you can understand it *without*
having to think about *unrolling* of the recursion as we just did.

Finally we note that the the precondition is essential. If it were not
there in the mathematical definition, the definition would not be what
mathematicians call *well founded*: the recursive definition might
never stop looping back on itself. Just think about what would happen
if you could apply the function to *-1*. The definition would involve
the function applied to *-2*. And the definition of that would involve
the function applied to *-3*. You can see that there will be an
infinite regress. 

Similarly, if Dafny would allow the function to be applied to *any*
value of type *int*, it would be possible, in particular, to apply the
function to negative values, and that would be bad!  Evaluating the
expression, *factorial(-1)* would involve the recursive evaluation of
the expression, *factorial(-2)*, and you can see that the evaluation
process would never end. The program would go into an "infinite loop"
(technically an unbounded recursion). By doing so, the program would
also violate the fundamental promise made by its type: that for *any*
integer-valued argument, an integer result will be produced. That can
not happen if the evaluation process never returns a result. We see
the precondition in the code, implementing the domain restriction in
the mathematical definition, is indispensible. It makes the definition
sound and it makes the code correct!

Dafny is a Program Verifier
===========================

Restricting the domain of factorial to non-negative integers is
critical. Combining the non-negative property of ever value to which
the function is applied with the fact that every recursive application
is to a smaller value of *n*, allows us to conclude that no *infinite
decreasing chains* are possible. Any application of the function to a
non-negative integer *n* will terminate after exactly *n* recursive
calls to the function. Every non-negative integer, *n* is finite. So
every call to the function will terminate.

Termination is a critical *property* of programs. The proposition that
our factorial program with the precondition in place always terminates
is true as we've argued. Without the precondition, the proposition is
false.

Underneath Dafny's "hood," it has a system for proving propositions
about (i.e., properties of) programs. Here we see that It generates a
propostion that each recursive function terminates; and it requires a
proof that each such proposition is true.

With the precondition in place, there not only is a proof, but Dafny
can find it on its own. If you remove the precondition, Dafny won't be
able to find a proof, because, as we just saw, there isn't one: the
proposition that evaluation of the function always terminates is not
true. In this case, because it can't prove termination, Dafny will
issue an error stating, in effect, that there is the possibility that
the program will infinitely loop. Try it in Dafny.  You will see.

In some cases there will be proofs of important propositions that
Dafny nevertheless can't find it on its own. In such cases, you may
have to help it by giving it some additional propositions that it
can verify and that help point it in the right direction. We'll see
more of this later.

The Dafny language and verification system is powerful mechansim for
finding subtle bugs in code, but it require a knowledge of more than
just programming. It requires an understanding of specification, and
of the languages of logic and proofs in which specifications of code
are expressed and verified.
